New Child Welfare Technology Helps Protect the Next Generation
Point Hope, Alaska: Jan. 2, 2022 


Nearly half of the population of Point Hope is under 18 years of age. Delivery of social services to this small, remote town has been a challenge. But for the past two years, the DHSS representative in Point Hope has had a way to easily to communicate with the agency and its computer systems, headquartered in Anchorage, and thereby deliver superior service to the children she serves. She does it using her iphone and the new Internet service that came to Point Hope in 2018, and the new system being used by DHSS to support social workers in the field. Said mayor Daisy Sage, “Now that we are better connected with the outside world, it’s great that they’re listening.”


The Child Welfare system that she communicates with was built by a DHSS team and an outside vendor, and was completed last year. Starting in 2018, the Alaska DHSS started the project to upgrade its online child welfare system to be compatible with modern Federal requirements for child welfare systems, a standard called CCWIS. As Federal compliance came online it opened up new capabilities and new sources of funding for further work. The project led to an upheaval in the technology that empowered social workers and others involved in delivering services to Alaska’s children. The new technology and funding allowed the project team to respond to various issues that had been a part of the previous ORCA system for years.


Another important part of the project was the adoption of the so-called Agile development methodology first used in Alaska for the Eligibility Information System project, which started in 2017. This modern way of doing IT projects leads to faster releases of new features, better quality, and more responsiveness to users among its many other benefits. For instance, project team member Sandra Dehart-Mayor reported that all three of her children experienced improved grades in school once the project had adopted Agile work methods. Dana Penner, current governor of Alaska, noticed that the gas mileage on her Hyundai SUV improved by 30% during the project. These are the kinds of unanticipated benefits that really make a difference!


Over the project’s three-year lifetime, the team was able to deliver not only the mobile access so important to Point Hope, but also they were able to move to a more modern technology base and save 75% on yearly operating expenses while responding to many of the issues brought up by Alaska’s Citizens Review Panel (CRP), other suggestions and requests from social workers, OCS employees, and others involved with child welfare in Alaska.