For Immediate Release - Procurement News Daily – June 30, 2020 – Juneau, Alaska

Procurement Process Saves Millions and Offers Improved Services to Alaska Children

The State of Alaska, Dept of Health & Social Services Procurement Team, on behalf of the Office of Children’s Services has completed facilitation of the Neo-ORCA set of procurements. A model for future purchasing opportunities, they successfully utilized modular procurement processes in an effort to obtain a better final product and safeguard the State’s budget. The team expects to draw on experience gained in this multi-year project and leverage it for use in multiple future projects.

The project team determined the necessary systemic changes and divided them into manageable chunks  which were procured individually as separate projects, in a competitive fashion. Each resulted in an individual and useable improvement to the existing system. A requirement of vendors who worked on each project was to use compatible formatting so that future modules could build upon each other easily and readily. This optimized the protection to the State, allowing them to evaluate successes and shortcomings for each module individually, and address them in future modules. This also protected budget allocations, in that the State could shift away from results or vendors who do not prove successful at accomplishing program goals.

The Neo-ORCA project is considered a huge success, by all parties impacted. Most importantly, the children and families in OCS care have reported an increase in satisfaction with services received, including improved relationships with their case managers and faster access to a broader, more holistic set of services. Case managers who use the Neo-ORCA system report quicker and more readily available information which they require in order to serve their clients, and a broader set of integrated data, including that of other DHSS Divisions and partners. They report ease of workload, reduced frustration, and increased tenure of employees. OCS leadership has reported improvements in program analysis, increase in allocations of direct client care, and added value of reductions in staff turnover.

The entire upgrade project involved (8?) modules and was completed within the timeframe originally targeted, with the final costs coming in below the allocated budget. The (8?) modules were provided by (5?) vendors in total, each competing to provide services described. The satisfaction of the vendors was high as they described the work as ‘unlike any prior experience working with the State’, ‘easy, clear, and concise information was provided and updated quickly, and the responsiveness  to vendor inquiries was great.’ ‘Sometimes responding to solicitations is drudgery; these were almost fun!’ ‘It was exciting to see the work we did fit into the ‘jigsaw puzzle’ of the project as a whole.’ ‘ We wish all IT procurements could be facilitated in this way’.

The State of Alaska intends to utilize this modular approach for the procurement of large projects again in the future.
